hyderabadi veg biryani recipe - a vegetable biryani recipe from the land of the nawabs -hyderabad. the hyderabadi vegetable biryani recipe is light, a bit spiced, aromatic and deliciously yum.
author: dassana
recipe type: main
cuisine: indian
serves: 4 to 5
ingredients (measuring cup used, 1 cup = 250 ml)
prepping rice:

    1.5 cups basmati rice, 300 grams
    1 cup water for soaking rice

prepping veggies:

    150 grams cauliflower, 1.5 cups medium cauliflower florets
    90 to 100 grams potatoes, 2 medium potatoes or ¾ to 1 cup chopped potatoes
    90 to 100 grams carrots or 1 medium to large carrot, ½ cup chopped carrots
    50 grams french beans or 11 to 12 french beans, ¼ cup chopped french beans
    8 to 9 button mushroom, sliced or chopped, (optional)
    1 small to medium green bell pepper or capsicum, 40 to 60 grams, ¼ to ⅓ cup chopped bell pepper (optional)
    ½ cup fresh or frozen peas.
    115 grams onion or 1 large onion or 1 heaped cup thinly sliced onions
    10 grams ginger or 2 pieces of 2 inch ginger or 1.5 tbsp finely chopped ginger or 1 tbsp ginger paste
    5 grams garlic or 10 to 12 medium garlic cloves or 1 tbsp finely chopped garlic or ½ tbsp garlic paste

for cooking rice:

    2 green cardamoms/hari elaichi or choti elaichi
    2 black cardamoms/badi elaichi
    2 cloves/laung/lavang
    1 cinnamon/dalchini of 1 inch
    1 indian bay leaf/tej patta
    2 single mace strands/javitri
    5 cups water
    ½ tsp salt or add as per taste

for vegetable gravy:

    3 tbsp ghee (can use 3 tbsp oil instead of ghee)
    1 tsp shah jeera
    1 tej patta
    3 green cardamoms
    3 cloves
    1 black cardamon
    1 inch cinnamon
    1 cup fresh whisked yogurt/curd/dahi (200 grams)
    ½ tsp turmeric powder
    1 tsp red chilli powder
    ½ cup water for pressure cooking and ¾ cup water if cooking in a pot
    2 tbsp cashews
    1 tbsp sultanas/raisins
    2 tbsp almonds/badam, raw or blanched, peeled and sliced
    salt as required

for assembling and layering:

    20 grams coriander leaves or ⅓ cup chopped coriander leaves
    5 grams mint leaves or ⅓ cup mint leaves, chopped
    4 to 5 tbsp milk
    ¼ tsp saffron/kesar strands
    2 tsp kewra water or rose water

how to make the recipe:
prepping:

    pick and rinse basmati rice in running water till the water runs clear of starch. soak the rice in 1 cup of water for 30 minutes.
    after 30 minutes drain the rice and keep aside.
    when the rice is soaking prep all the veggies and other ingredients. keep aside.

cooking rice:

    take a deep bottomed pan. add 5 cups water and heat the water on a high flame.
    when the water becomes hot, add all the spices and salt - 1 tej patta, 3 green cardamoms, 3 cloves, 1 black cardamom, 1 inch cinnamon.
    bring the water to a boil. then add the rice.
    just gently stir with a spoon or fork, after you add the rice.
    do not reduce the flame and continue to cook the rice.
    the rice has to be 75% or ¾th cooked. the grains should have a slight bite to them when cooked. the rice should not be fully cooked but almost cooked.
    drain the rice in a colander. gently fluff and keep aside.

preparing gravy:

    in a pressure cooker or a pan, heat 3 tbsp ghee. add the following spices - 1 tsp shah jeera, 1 tej patta, 3 green cardamoms, 3 cloves, 1 black cardamom, 1 inch cinnamon. sauté the garam masala till they crackle.
    now add the onions. stir and sauté them on a low to medium flame.
    onions take a lot of time to cook, so add a pinch of salt to quicken the cooking process.
    when the onions are cooking, take 1 cup fresh curd/yogurt in a bowl. beat the curd with a spoon or whisk till it become smooth.
    sauté the onions till they become golden brown or caramelize.
    then add the ginger-garlic paste and sliced green chillies. you can also finely chop the ginger-garlic and add.
    sauté till the raw aroma of ginger-garlic goes away.
    add the turmeric and red chili powder. stir and mix well.
    next add the chopped veggies. sauté for a minute or two.
    add the yogurt. stir. then add water.
    season with salt. stir again.
    pressure cook for 1 whistle on medium flame. if cooking in a pot, then cook till the veggies are done. don’t over cook the veggies.
    warm 4 to 5 tbsp milk in a microwave or in a small pan on the stove top. add ¼ tsp of saffron strands. stir and keep aside.
    when the pressure settles down on its own, remove the lid and check the gravy. if the veggies are not cooked well, then keep the cooker on the stove top and simmer the gravy without the lid, till the veggies are cooked. if there is too much of water or stock in the gravy, then simmer till some water dries up. the gravy should have a medium or slightly thick consistency and should not be watery.
    now add cashews, raisins and almonds (blanched or raw) to the vegetable gravy. mix and stir. keep aside. do check the salt. add more if required.

assembling and layering:

    now in a thick bottomed pan, layer half of the gravy first.
    then layer half of the rice.
    sprinkle half of the chopped coriander, mint leaves and saffron milk.
    layer the remaining gravy.
    layer the remainder of the rice. sprinkle the remaining coriander, mint leaves, saffron milk on the top. sprinkle 2 tsp of rose water or kewra water. you can make 2 layers or 4 layers like i have done. but do remember that rice should be the last layer.
    now seal and secure the pot with aluminium foil. then cover with a lid. you can also seal the handi with a moist cotton cloth and then cover with the lid.
    take a tava/griddle and heat it on medium flame.
    when the tawa become hot, then lower the flame. keep the sealed biryani handi on the tava. keep the flame to the lowest and cook for 25-30 minutes. you can also dum cook biryani for the first 15 minutes on direct low flame and then for the last 10 minutes, place the handi on the hot tava and cook on a low flame.
    for baking - you could also preheat the oven to 180 degree celsius and then bake the biryani in the oven for 20-25 minutes. please remember to use an oven proof glass utensil like the pyrex bowl for baking in the oven. you will have to assemble the biryani as mentioned above in the oven proof utensil and then bake it.
    serve the delicious hyderabadi veg biryani with your choice of raita, onion salad,mango pickle, roasted papad.